
For slides, see http://www.slideshare.net/secret/HEAfGNBicoQXzY 

Slide 

I'm Mike Jang, Senior Technical Writer for a company called ForgeRock. 

We create Identity Management software as web applications


I work in our metro Portland office – there are 26 of us

24 devs, QA, and support, 1 office manager – and me, the writer

It's my mission to spread the word
To make sure that people know the good work that our developers do
To make sure that our deployers can take advantage of the features that we build into our product


I want to help you do the same

In this talk, I'll describe key topics that you need to include in your docs

-- and anyone can follow those topics 

*****

First some disclaimers – I have a bias – towards open source. 
So if you're not interested in open source, you're welcome to “zone out” when I talk about 
source code and copyrights

I'll be pushing a bit – if you want simple documentation, 

you'll need an easy button. 

But creating that button can be difficult. 

It means scripting, it means doing the work once, 

so many admins can do the same thing in a consistent way, every time they install, use, or upgrade your product

*******

While I'll be talking about documentation – the title is important

We have a subject – webapps – a focus of the fluent conference
	and we have an audience – deployers
		The people who you want to install and run  your webapps


Slide

So who is your audience – I'd split them into three categories

The first one is pretty obvious 
	As developers, we hope that the people who will install your software understand us
	And you think you can pretty much talk like a normal developer in your doc 

	But.....      – not all admins – have DevOps experience

	And they may have gotten their jobs through certification
		yeah, that piece of paper. 		

	So yes, we need to explain a few things
	
But as for the next two audiences – if I were you, I might think

Are you kidding me?
	
	https://pixabay.com/en/audience-crowd-event-people-648476/ CC0


Slide

But wait – 
This is San Francisco. We're in the center of the startup world

	And what's the focus – if we have a great product, a great idea, 

		We want to get attention  – from Analysts and Venture Capitalists

		Sure, many of these people have a technical background

	But they don't have a lot of time to read your code 

	And they're the people who make a difference

	to the success or failure of your webapp
	
	https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/San_Francisco_Bay_Area#/media/File:SF_From_Marin_Highlands3.jpg (public domain)

Slide 

Stepping back a moment – I Googled “just read the code” a few days ago, and got over 300,000 results!

I know, a lot of you are proud of your self-documenting code. 
And yes, when I take the time to read such code, 

it can help me understand the intent of an application. 
However, when code starts getting real, when it goes beyond say a few hundred lines – 

Pixabay image, CC0 public domain


Slide: Self-Documenting Code

If you're a kid with 20/20 vision, this JavaScript code excerpt is easy to read...

For me, it takes 4 or 5 of these files, 
before it feels like I'm reading the front page of the New York Times

ForgeRock open source code:
https://stash.forgerock.org/projects/OPENIDM/repos/openidm/browse/openidm-ui/openidm-ui-admin/src/main/js/org/forgerock/openidm/ui/admin/selfservice/PasswordResetConfigView.js


Slide: New York Times

This bit is from 1914, when they didn't even bother with pictures!

https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:New_York_Times_1914-07-29.jpg public domain


Slide

And to your audience – especially analysts and VCs –

it starts looking like this -- a picture of human DNA

That's not what you want when that analyst or venture capitalist starts looking at your software
(US Government picture)


Slide

To quote that UI design book, “Don't Make Me Think”

If your code makes someone think – 
	Your geekiest admins might still be interested – if they're one of your support engineers

	But the analysts – and your potential VC investors....

	What would they do with your project... well, you know :)

http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0321965515/


Slide


Now you've created a web app. You know that it's the best thing since sliced bread. You want to tell the world about it. 
The first question is: HOW

If you're a developer, you'll start with a README.

You could be a Hemingway, You could share your info with a Selfie.

But that's just one option. You could blog. You could even YouTube it.

Whatever you do, don't forget to show the fabulous things that your potential customers can do. 

Whatever media you select, the elements you should share are the same
	

https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ernest_Hemingway_Writing_at_Campsite_in_Kenya_-_NARA_-_192655.jpg (National Archives, free license) 

https://pixabay.com/en/selfie-stick-selfie-stick-phone-911852/ (CCO public domain)


Slide: 

Here are the 10 big picture elements: 

My 10 steps to a better README --

10 steps to excellent documentation. 

-- we'll go through them, one at a time. And yes, I'll include code snippets where appropriate


Slide: 

So what's the need for your software? 

In open source lore – the story of good software

scratches that itch – 

Some common use case that justifies all the work that potential users – and customers need to put in to 
put your software into production

by the way, that's my dog Katie, scratching her itch :

(own picture)


Slide

This is your chance to tell the world, in a few short words, 

why ---- your software

It's a chance to show empathy -- in the open source world, it is your chance to describe what itch you're scratching

Presumably, others have the same itch


(picture taken by speaker)

Slide:

This is the chance to tell the world – at least the people who read and hear about your software

in the simplest possible terms

Pixabay image, CC0 public domain


Slide:

Linus Torvalds did it in his initial emails on Linux

A little back-story: UNIX was free for the longest time. 
Back in the 1990s, corporate America was taking UNIX away

Linus described the need for a replacement, as a community operating system
He presented Linux as a solution

We listened, and the world was forever changed.

Photo credit: "Linus Torvalds" by Unknown who sold rights to linuxmag.com


Slide: 

The way you describe a "Need" is important. Keep it simple. You're not writing a novel, you're presenting your software
to the broadest possible audience.

So when you present a "need", write a short, declarative sentence.

My webapp {verb} {feature}

Look at some of these verbs. When you start describing your webapp, think of this. 
What's the main feature of your software. 
What's the name of your webapp
What does it do?

Get that right, and you'll have the introduction that you need.


Slide:
One more slide on Need – some examples
So you can start thinking about your product, your personal project
How you can set it up for success


Slide: 

Now that you've gotten people's attention – or maybe even that venture capitalist

They're primed. They're ready – to build that foundation – the picture I'm trying to show :)

They understand that software has prerequisites – and they're ready to listen.

They have a crush on you – and it's time for you to test those limitations

If you say: I don't do Linux, and they still love you – 

You're helping potential users create their foundation. 

Pixabay image, CC0 public domain


Slide

Make a checklist of your requirements. 

People who “Know” that your software will meet their needs, will use your checklist

If you require

RHEL 7
Java 8
8 Gigs of RAM

Now's the time to say so!

You can create scripts to install software – but the reader is responsible for their own hardware and operating system.

And create a checklist – so your readers know what hardware they really need.

https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/79/Foundation-M2325.jpg/1024px-Foundation-M2325.jpg Public domain


Slide: 

Now it's time to help that reader set up installation

Your users have worked hard already. 

You want to make it as easy as possible for a user

If possible, set up a script that unpacks the archive, set up some default working version of your software

Also known as the easy button

By User:Yskyflyer (own work (2 feet from my computer, On my Desk)) [CC BY-SA 2.5 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.5)], via Wikimedia Commons
 https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=854553 


Slide:

We know what people expect when they've successfully set up some software

Hello World!

Make sure they see that when they install your web application

Pixabay image, CC0 public domain



Slide:

Here's an example of what users see when they install NGINX

They've congratulated the user on success 
– they warn the user that they need to do more
– they give them directions on what to do next – either see the * Linked * doc,
–--- or get commercial support 

own screenshot, after installation of NGINX on Ubuntu


Slide: 

Now that your users have installed your software, it's time to take them from

Hello World to Hello Mars

Show them how to change a configuration file

Even if it's just setting up your first virtual website

Pixabay image, CC0 public domain



Slide: 

The Apache project does an excellent job of this

They include sample code of how to get from 
Hello world to Hello Mars. 

This is an excerpt from the Apache 2.2 httpd.conf configuration file
	which includes comments on how to set up a virtual website
	

Excerpt from httpd.conf, Apache 2.0 license


Slide

Of course, we're working with web applications, 

which require more than just HTML

as we've seen over the past few days at this conference

One motto our devs use – is: You can do anything with our webapp, if you just modify the Javascript

Yeah, I know – this is JSON, but 

the Axiom applies, independent of the language you might use


Slide: 

Here's how I'd document this -- I'd say password policy, you could say password complexity

The simplest approach is to include a table with just the essentials:

minLength
numCaps
numNums
disallowedFields

Keep it simple -- nobody's eyes would glaze over



Slide

Here's another code sample from the same web application

Real Javascript! With functions!

If you want people to use these functions, you'll have to explain them

Thus:


Slide:

We have documentation that describes functionality

In this case, of OpenIDM dot create, we show people what they can do

Yeah, if you have to do it for all functions in your webapp, that may seem excessive

But that's real life with webapps


Slide:

Instead of guiding users into source code

You could set up a UI for your admins

And it's a pretty thing – Sales engineers love a UI

Yeah, a UI can be a good front end for changing configuration files


Slide:

But a UI is not enough

When you create a UI, you need text

This file for our UI has over 2000 lines

Yeah, it's been good for us, but....


Slide:

So back to builds... 

If you're documenting code samples, 

you're stimulating developers, who may want to build their customizations, into your code

They'll want to build your product 

You should show them how to build, like you build

Even if it's as simple as cloning your code

Installing Java, etc. 

and running mvn clean install 


Slide: 

Tips and Tricks – Really a glib title, as this is the heart of most documentation. 

If you're just starting your webapp, you can use this section to show “what's cool”

But after all of this code, do you think users are in the mood for more? 



Slide: 

They want something useful 

Give them the use cases

And show them how it works

Sure it's great if you can do it with an administrative UI

But that isn't always possible in our world



Slide: Troubleshooting

People are busy. They'll skip steps.

What steps do you ask?

Start with the prerequisites

For example, if you require some version of Java,

you'll need an environment variable

What error do you see if they don't have that variable?


Slide: 

This applies only if you want contributions

Yeah, it's normally associated with Open Source software

But it's one of the challenges of excellent documentation

Pixabay image, CC0 public domain


Slide: Contributions: result




Slide: 

This is one subject of dread

IANAL

We are in the US

Legally, if you don't choose a license, you default to US copyright law

If you don't care about Open Source, that should be fine


Slide: 

If you do care about Open Source, GitHub provides an excellent guide

This screenshot is from choosealicense dot com – 

It can help you choose from a variety of Open Source licenses

I won't get into the religious wars between the GPL and other licenses 
	such as Apache and MIT. I

I'll just say that choices are available – 

and even the GPL is a copyright license – even if they refer to it as “copyleft”

Slide:

Whatever license you choose, do maintain the year in your code

Most of our code is shared under an open source copyright license, 

And every time we change or add to it in a new year, we update the copyright
on that file. 

Copyright law – whatever the intricacies, depends on the year of publication


Slide: Upgrades

A necessary evil

Your product isn't perfect. Even if it is the perfect mousetrap, you'll have users who will want more

Every time I do an upgrade, I hold my breath

I wonder – what are the risks? What will I gain

Thus I need a change log


Slide:

But sometimes, I just need that additional feature 

– that radar dome atop the Boeing 767 that you see here.

Wouldn't it be cool if you could just add that radar dome


Slide: 

Just by clicking that Easy button?

Well, that takes work. 

The choice is yours. You can document

1) How to change the configuration of your webapp
2) To upgrade your system, run the following command...


Slide:

So what are those lessons learned?

From this talk you know

How to describe the Need
The importance of making tasks easy for the deployer
and the need to illustrate useful ways to customize

I've given you a structure
You now have -- at least some of the tools that you need
to 

Help deployers run your webapps
